---
title: "Identification of novel natural product inhibitors of BRD4 using high throughput virtual screening and MD simulation"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2022-12-16-paper-title-number-4
excerpt: Bromodomains, vital in gene expression regulation, are implicated in various diseases, making them targets for therapeutic intervention. BRD4, a well-studied bromodomain in cancers like AML and Burkitt Lymphoma, has attracted attention for inhibitor development. However, existing inhibitors often lack specificity and safety. Our study screened natural compounds from the NPASS database against BRD4-BD1 using computational methods. Five inhibitors with comparable or superior binding affinity compared to JQ1 were identified, including NPC268484 (Palodesangren-B), NPC295021 (Candidine), and NPC313112 (Buxifoliadine-D). These findings offer potential candidates for further validation in future experimental studies.
date: 2022-12-16
venue: 'J Biomol Struct Dyn'
paperurl: 'https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/07391102.2022.2155346'
citation: 'Barman S, Sahoo SS, Padhan J, Sudhamalla B. Identification of novel natural product inhibitors of BRD4 using high throughput virtual screening and MD simulation. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2022 Dec 16:1-13.'
---

Bromodomains are evolutionarily conserved structural motifs that recognize acetylated lysine residues on histone tails. They play a crucial role in shaping chromatin architecture and regulating gene expression in various biological processes. Mutations in bromodomains containing proteins lead to multiple human diseases, which makes them attractive target for therapeutic intervention. Extensive studies have been done on BRD4 as a target for several cancers, such as Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) and Burkitt Lymphoma. Several potential inhibitors have been identified against the BRD4 bromodomain. However, most of these inhibitors have drawbacks such as non-specificity and toxicity, decreasing their appeal and necessitating the search for novel non-toxic inhibitors. This study aims to address this need by virtually screening natural compounds from the NPASS database against the Kac binding site of BRD4-BD1 using high throughput molecular docking followed by similarity clustering, pharmacokinetic screening, MD simulation and MM-PBSA binding free energy calculations. Using this approach, we identified five natural product inhibitors having a similar or better binding affinity to the BRD4 bromodomain compared to JQ1 (previously reported inhibitor of BRD4). Further systematic analysis of these inhibitors resulted in the top three hits: NPC268484 (Palodesangren-B), NPC295021 (Candidine) and NPC313112 (Buxifoliadine-D). Collectively, our in silico results identified some promising natural products that have the potential to act as potent BRD4-BD1 inhibitors and can be considered for further validation through future in vitro and in vivo studies.
