---
title: "Uncovering the Domain-Specific Interactome of the TAF1 Tandem Reader Using Site-Specific Azide-Acetyllysine Photochemistry"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2010-10-01-paper-title-number-2
excerpt: In this study, we investigated how TAF1 dual bromodomain mediates crosstalk among histone modifications. We engineered TAF1 to carry a photoactivatable amino acid, AzF and created analogs targeting each bromodomain separately and both together. Structural integrity was confirmed, and binding properties to acetylated histone ligands were characterized. Both bromodomains independently recognized unique interacting partners at the cellular level. Our findings suggest that BD1 and BD2 of the TAF1 tandem reader independently regulate downstream cellular functions by recognizing specific interacting partners.
date: 2023-01-17
venue: 'Biochemistry'
paperurl: 'https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.biochem.2c00140'
citation: 'Yadav Y, Barman S#, Roy A#, Padhan J, Sudhamalla B. Uncovering the Domain-Specific Interactome of the TAF1 Tandem Reader Using Site-Specific Azide-Acetyllysine Photochemistry. Biochemistry. 2023 Jan 17;62(2):270-280'
---

Combinatorial readout of histone post-translational modifications by tandem reader modules mediates crosstalk among different histone modifications. To identify the domain-specific interactome of the tandem reader, we engineered the dual bromodomain of TATA-binding protein-associated factor-1 (TAF1) to carry a photoactivatable unnatural amino acid, 4-azido-l-phenylalanine (AzF), via amber suppressor mutagenesis. Using computational approaches, we modeled the targeted residues of TAF1 with AzF to predict the cross-linking distance between the reactive arylazide and its interacting partner. We developed three photoactivatable TAF1 tandem-bromodomain analogues, viz., Y1403AzF in bromodomain 1 (BD1), W1526AzF in bromodomain 2 (BD2), and Y1403AzF/W1526AzF in both BD1 and BD2. Circular dichroism and a thermal shift assay were used to confirm the structural integrity of the engineered readers. Using the TAF1 tandem-bromodomain analogues, we characterized their histone ligand binding properties by isothermal titration calorimetry and photo-cross-linking experiments. We found that the dual bromodomain of TAF1 independently binds and cross-links to different acetylated histone ligands. We further used the engineered BD1 and BD2 analogues of the TAF1 tandem readers to identify their domain-specific interacting partners at the cellular level. Both BD1 and BD2 independently cross-link to a unique interactome, and importantly, the dual cross-linker carrying TAF1 analogue could capture both BD1- and BD2-specific interactomes. Our work concludes that BD1 and BD2 of the TAF1 tandem reader independently recognize their interacting partners to regulate downstream cellular functions.