---
title: "Integrated virtual screening and MD simulation approaches toward discovering potential inhibitors for targeting BRPF1 bromodomain in hepatocellular carcinoma"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2010-10-01-paper-title-number-2
excerpt: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a deadly cancer with limited treatment options. We analyzed bromodomain-containing proteins (BRPF) in HCC and found BRPF1 to be significantly upregulated, correlating with poor patient survival. Targeting BRPF1 could improve HCC treatment. We employed high-throughput virtual screening and machine learning-based QSAR modeling to identify new BRPF1 inhibitors. Through extensive molecular dynamics simulations, we discovered four lead compounds with promising binding affinity for the BRPF1 bromodomain, suggesting their potential as potent inhibitors for HCC therapy.
date: 2023-09-26
venue: 'Journal of Molecular Graphics and Modelling'
paperurl: 'https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1093326323002401?via%3Dihub'
citation: 'Barman S, Bardhan I, Padhan J, Sudhamalla B.Integrated virtual screening and MD simulation approaches toward discovering potential inhibitors for targeting BRPF1 bromodomain in hepatocellular carcinoma. Journal of Molecular Graphics and Modelling. 2023, 108642, ISSN 1093-3263.'
---

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most aggressive and life-threatening cancers. Although multiple treatment options are available, the prognosis of HCC patients is poor due to metastasis and drug resistance. Hence, discovering novel targets is essential for better therapeutic development for HCC. In this study, we used the cancer genome atlas (TCGA) dataset to analyze the expression of bromodomain-containing proteins in HCC, as bromodomains are emerging attractive therapeutic targets. Our analysis identified BRPF1 as the most highly upregulated gene in HCC among the 43 bromodomain-containing genes. Upregulation of BRPF1 was significantly associated with poorer patient survival. Therefore, targeting BRPF1 may be an approach for HCC treatment. Previously, several potential inhibitors of BRPF1 bromodomain have been discovered. However, due to the limited clinical success of the current inhibitors, we aim to search for new inhibitors with high affinity and specificity for the BRPF1 bromodomain. In this study, we utilized high-throughput virtual screening methods to screen synthetic and natural compound databases against the BRPF1 bromodomain. In addition, we used machine learning-based QSAR modeling to predict the IC50 values of the selected BRPF1 bromodomain inhibitors. Extensive MD simulations were used to calculate the binding free energies of BRPF1 bromodomain and inhibitor complexes. Using this approach, we identified four lead scaffolds with a similar or better binding affinity towards the BRPF1 bromodomain than the previously reported inhibitors. Overall, this study discovered some promising compounds that have the potential to act as potent BRPF1 bromodomain inhibitors.