---
title: "Amyloid β‑Peptide Segment Conjugated Side-Chain Proline-Based Polymersas Potent Inhibitors in Lysozyme Amyloidosis"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2010-10-01-paper-title-number-2
excerpt: This study introduces a novel approach to inhibit amyloidosis using peptides derived from the amyloid-promoting sequence of amyloid β-peptide, conjugated with side-chain proline-based methacrylate polymers. These conjugates effectively inhibit lysozyme amyloidosis and reduce cytotoxicity of amyloid aggregations. Synthesized di-, tri-, and tetra-peptide conjugated chain transfer agents (CTAs) were used to polymerize Boc-proline methacryloyloxyethyl ester, resulting in water-soluble polymers with defined peptide chain ends. Among these, the LVFF-conjugated polymer demonstrated potent inhibition of lysozyme amyloidosis, supported by spectroscopic, microscopic, and computational analyses. This study highlights the potential of combining segment-derived amyloid β-peptide sequences with side-chain proline-based polymers for targeting amyloidosis.
date: 2024-02-12
venue: 'Bioconjugate Chem.'
paperurl: 'https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.3c00509'
citation: 'Nayak K, Ghosh P, Barman S, Sudhamalla B, Theato P, De P. Amyloid β-Peptide Segment Conjugated SideChain Proline-Based Polymers as Potent Inhibitors in Lysozyme Amyloidosis. Bioconjugate Chemistry. 2024 Feb 12.'
---

Developing effective amyloidosis inhibitors poses a significant challenge due to the dynamic nature of the protein structures, the complex interplay of interfaces in protein–protein interactions, and the irreversible nature of amyloid assembly. The interactions of amyloidogenic polypeptides with other peptides play a pivotal role in modulating amyloidosis and fibril formation. This study presents a novel approach for designing and synthesizing amyloid interaction surfaces using segments derived from the amyloid-promoting sequence of amyloid β-peptide [VF(Aβ(18–19)/FF(Aβ(19–20)/LVF(Aβ(17–19)/LVFF(Aβ(17–20)], where VF, FF, LVF and LVFF stands for valine phenylalanine dipeptide, phenylalanine phenylalanine dipeptide, leucine valine phenylalanine tripeptide and leucine valine phenylalanine phenylalanine tetrapeptide, respectively. These segments are conjugated with side-chain proline-based methacrylate polymers serving as potent lysozyme amyloidosis inhibitors and demonstrating reduced cytotoxicity of amyloid aggregations. Di-, tri-, and tetra-peptide conjugated chain transfer agents (CTAs) were synthesized and used for the reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer polymerization of tert-butoxycarbonyl (Boc)-proline methacryloyloxyethyl ester (Boc-Pro-HEMA). Deprotection of Boc-groups from the side-chain proline pendants resulted in water-soluble polymers with defined peptide chain ends as peptide–polymer bioconjugates. Among them, the LVFF-conjugated polymer acted as a potent inhibitor with significantly suppressed lysozyme amyloidosis, a finding supported by comprehensive spectroscopic, microscopic, and computational analyses. These results unveil the synergistic effect between the segment-derived amyloid β-peptide and side-chain proline-based polymers, offering new prospects for targeting lysozyme amyloidosis.